2
NEW INSPIRATION 4
Grammar EXTRA!  Worksheet 2
Past perfect simple and continuous
1a	Complete the grammar rules with the words in the box.
been    had
1	 We make the past perfect simple with          + past participle.
2	 We make the past perfect continuous with had +          + present participle.
b	Match the rules with the examples below.
Example	a	 I had been teaching for many years. 
Example	b	 I started writing after I had finished my exams. 
2	 Read the text about Jay White. Underline all the examples of the past perfect simple and circle all the 
examples of the past perfect continuous.
Jay White had always wanted to be a writer. He wrote his first story when he was 
five and sent it in to a competition – it won! After he had won the competition 
he started writing every day. His first book was published in 1979 when he was 
only 12. ‘I’d been writing for seven years but I was still really excited when my first 
book came out.’
Since then he has written more than 30 books. Last year he entered another 
competition. He chose to enter a book he had written when he was only nine. 
Why did he choose this particular book? ‘I’d been thinking about this story for a 
long time. Although I was only nine when I wrote it I thought it was one of the 
best stories I had ever created.’ We all wish Jay the best of luck in the competition.
3	 Choose the correct words.
1	 I didn’t understand / hadn’t understood what was happening because I didn’t listen / hadn’t been listening.
2	 I didn’t pay / hadn’t been paying attention in class so I got / had got all the answers wrong in the test today.
3	 She left / had left by the time we arrived / had arrived.
4	 She was / had been upset when we arrived because I forgot / had forgotten to tell her we’d be late.
5	 He waited / had been waiting for three years when she finally said / had said she would marry him.
4	 Complete the sentences using the correct past perfect simple or past perfect continuous form 
of the verbs in brackets.
1	 By the time he was 29 he                (write) ten books.
2	 I                (enter) competitions for years before I won.
3	 She                never                (read) a play by Shakespeare until she went to university.
4	 I                (think) of what to write when suddenly I had a great idea for a story.
5	 Before I was fifteen I                not                (enjoy) reading.
6	 It was New Year’s Day and it                (snow) for about twelve hours.
4
This page has been downloaded from www.macmillanenglish.com/inspiration
© Macmillan Publishers Limited 2012. This sheet may be photocopied and used within the class.